Yen came to Nick's Facebook question: "My
boyfriend and I have been together for
three years. During those three years, we've overcome so
many challenges, but at the
last minute, his parents strongly opposed our
relationship. In the beginning, he was very simple.
Since his parents' disapproval, he's changed his
life. He abandoned his child, and I still
love him very much. Should I
continue this relationship? I hope you can give
me some advice." To the audience:
This is just one of dozens of
questions a day about
love and the obstacles and suffering it faces that
young people send to Hien's Facebook page.
Hien can only answer
a few; it depends on the situation.
Today, these young people are experiencing
heartbreak – heartbreak, yes,
it's very painful. From this pain, they
want to win back their loved one,
they want to hold on to the relationship. Being
abandoned is very
painful; people feel lost and alone because
when a lover leaves them, when a
lover betrays them, it's usually...
People often think about the peaceful and beautiful moments they shared
together, and because they think about those
peaceful and beautiful moments, it becomes
even harder for them to leave each other. That means
people often think about the past and not the
present. In Buddhism, there's a saying: "
The past is gone, the
future hasn't arrived yet.
Dwelling in the present moment is true Nirvana."
This means that in the present moment,
resolving matters in the
present moment leads to liberation and
peace. I will apply
this saying to the situations of those of you
experiencing heartbreak, whether in marriage or in a relationship.
It's all about fate and karma;
loving each other is fate, but marriage also involves
debt. Because in married life, there's
a lot of debt to be repaid to each other. For example, there's a
shared debt to the child,
right? Having a child means sharing a
debt, and the husband must repay
it together. Then the husband
owes the wife; when the wife is sick, the
husband must care for her; the husband owes the wife; the husband owes the
wife.  A husband must be indebted to his wife
if his business fails, right? From
there, all conflicts begin to
arise. That is, there's mutual
harm; if I conflict with him,
I create a sin; if he conflicts with me, I
create a sin. Right? If a husband lies to his wife, the
husband creates a sin; if the wife lies to her husband, the
wife creates a sin. Therefore, marriage must involve mutual benefit;
without mutual benefit, it's impossible to
be husband and wife. No one lives with their husband and gets everything they want completely, right? Unfulfilled desires are called suffering, understand? If things don't go as you wish, whatever you pray for doesn't come true, you fall into suffering. The wife also brings suffering to the husband; the
husband also brings suffering to the wife; the husband also brings joy to the wife; the wife also
brings joy to the husband—that's mutual benefit.
So when
you start dating, you must
know that love is destiny. Marriage is about
karma, so when you separate,
you know that you don't have any karma, only
destiny. Therefore, when people
separate, they must separate for any reason;
don't say otherwise.  People who
create karmic debt for each other
simply have to separate; they don't have a
marital destiny. The reason is due to their karma
manifesting. For example, if in a previous life
you caused someone suffering and betrayed them, then in this life you are in the form of
someone
betraying
you, right? That's because
your karma manifests, creating the destiny to
separate. For example, if in a previous life you lied and caused
someone to break up, then in this life, it
naturally creates a misunderstanding between you two.
That's because your karma
manifests, creating the destiny to separate when you
have no debt, only destiny.
So, if in a previous life you
slandered someone, for example, you had
a sister-in-law, you hated her,
you slandered her, saying, "You're having an affair," then in
this life you are being slandered by your lover, saying, "
You're this kind of person,
you're that kind of person, that's why I
can't marry you." That means when the
destiny to separate is due to the karma of each
person manifesting; there's no debt involved.
It's only destiny, that destiny.  Breaking up
is a manifestation of each person's karma,
not the other person's fault.
From an ordinary perspective,
we see others as harming us.
But if we see it through the lens of the
Buddha's understanding of cause and effect, everything that happens
to us is a manifestation of our own karma.
If we have good karma,
good people will come to us; if we have
bad karma,
bad people will come to us. That's because of
our karma. So when we experience
heartbreak, thinking this way,
we won't be resentful, angry, or bitter.
We'll be able to preserve the feelings we
once shared because we know
this is our karma manifesting itself. If there's
no benefit, then we shouldn't get married.
First,
thinking this way will lessen your
suffering because it's true; even if you wanted to
get married, you couldn't. Because if there's no
benefit, how can you get married? Another
important issue is
how you cope when you experience heartbreak.  If
you don't
suffer, then what is love?
Why do we fall in love before getting married? Why
do we meet but not get married right away? We have to fall in
love first. It's the
human heart. It's very mysterious; the
human heart contains everything within
it. The intellect, the intellect—that is, we
have choices, we consider. So when we love, it
's about choosing, about considering. See if
this person is compatible with us or not. That
's the
blessing we humans have.
Animals, on the other hand,
don't have that blessing. Male and female meet and
immediately mate; they don't
investigate, right? So, we humans
have the blessing of having a connection before we are
together, benefiting and repaying each other.
We have the opportunity to find what we're looking for. We look for
someone whose outward appearance
seems compatible with us. We look for
someone whose character is right, whether
their personality is compatible with
our family circumstances,
whether they will understand and
share with us, and whether they have enough
intelligence to...  Whether or not someone is compatible with you in
this life—that means people will
find out for themselves if they are compatible with someone else—
that's love.
Love is finding people who are compatible with
your own desires. It's the same for men and
women. When people don't find someone
compatible, they break
up because they don't understand what love is.
They assume that love means marriage,
so when they're in love and
don't find the other person compatible, they leave, and you
suffer. That's because you don't understand
what love is, right?
Look at the butterfly
; it flies from one flower to another, then to another.
Sometimes I see it fly almost through an entire
garden, then it flies back to the same
flower, the original one, and starts
sucking its pollen. The butterfly is
still searching, meaning humans, right?
So why do people in
love force each other to
marry? That's impossible. If
someone isn't compatible, they should tell
me during the relationship, "I'm not compatible," as long as
...  It's just a matter of incompatibility. If
someone tells you, "I'm not compatible with you in
this respect," then you should consider
whether you can fix that aspect. If you can't fix it,
you have to accept it. For example, there are
points that can't be fixed. They might say, "
I think you're too ugly," and that's something
you have to accept. Or, "I
think you're too poor," and if you're poor, then you have to accept it. If you
don't have money right now, then you have to
accept it because you're not
compatible with them, right? This is like
going to the market to buy
vegetables; it's up to your heart to buy them.
Why blame the other person? The
general public sees it, right? If you don't like
something, you pick it up, examine
it, and then put it down again. It's the same with love.
In a group of friends,
people assess each person individually and then
choose one to
get to know. So, from the beginning, you're searching, searching
among friends. You look at the
outward appearance, then you look
at the inner self.
You only understand the inner self when you're in love. Because
the process of falling in love involves...  There
are times of joy, times of sadness, times of hardship; it's
like that. Then there are times of illness and pain, and
people see what love is like. That's when
they test
each other's sincerity.
If they're not sincere,
they leave. It depends. If they're compatible,
they marry; if not, they leave.
So that's the meaning of
love. If we understand these two aspects
clearly, we won't
fall into
heartbreak. Because if you love
me and see my good points, you
marry me; if you don't see my good points, then you leave.
That means, although we use our
emotions, we must use our intellect to
control these feelings.
When we love someone and they love us back, we
must use our intellect.
This intellect must be based on morality; we
must behave well, and from that
good behavior, love will arise. A
person with intellect will have
love; a person without intellect will have
less love, right? For example,
humans have intellect.  Humans are more intelligent than animals,
which is why they have feelings like
husband and wife, father and son, grandparents – meaning that
feelings exist for generations. Therefore, intelligent people
have feelings, while
unintelligent people have less. That is,
their feelings are not noble, and those
without intelligence have
impure feelings. They fall in love at first sight, betraying each other
indiscriminately. They lack what we call "heartless,
meaningless" people; they fall in love with one person, then immediately fall in
love with another.
They lack intelligence, right? For example,
during the getting-to-know-each-other process, if you realize
you're not compatible, you should tell them you're
not compatible before moving on to
someone else. That's still showing intelligence and affection.
In
your case, it's the same. Even though you've
been together for 5, 7, or 10 years, you
haven't gotten married yet. You're still in
the getting-to-know-each-other process, so you can't
blame anyone, right? It's just
fate. So,
if you no longer have any
connection with me, your parents might object. But
if...  If you still have feelings for each other, then you still have a connection,
but if you've already let go, then
I'll go find someone
else who's more suitable
for me, someone more compatible, and then I'll marry them. It's
not like loving someone once
is the end. Regarding the law of karma,
how should we cultivate ourselves?
Why do some people meet someone, fall in
love immediately, get along immediately, and
get married immediately? What
karma led to this? Perhaps in their
past lives they often practiced giving, so their hearts received the things they desired. Remember, when you have good
karma, whatever you do will turn out
as you wish.
Finding a lover is just another part of
your life. Do you
see? If your heart is filled with giving, you
often meet the person you desire. For example, if your
husband loves you, if your wife loves
you, isn't that love accompanied by
care? Is
n't the care you receive from them due to your meritorious giving?  Giving alms often leads to desired
outcomes. That's why we receive
love and service from others.
In the course of life, if
we have a generous heart,
we reciprocate that love and service.
That's the reason why some people
encounter such situations; they give alms, bringing
joy to others, and thus have that karmic
connection. But
what if we don't have that karmic connection yet? First, we must also
give
alms, helping others from beginning
to end. We must keep our
promises; whatever we promise, we should
fulfill completely so we don't break our word,
right? We must know how to sow the seeds of karma
in every action. If we sow the seeds of
helping others through alms-giving and offerings—
for example, when we make offerings
to a temple, we think of
others benefiting in the long term—then in many lifetimes,
wherever we are born, when others
help us, we will always receive that
help in return. I'm just giving an
example: if in a previous life
we ​​were a person who knew how to give
alms, bringing benefits to others...  The benefit in the
future, you know? This is when we give alms
to the temple, doing good deeds. We want
people to take home a Buddhist scripture, and
then they will benefit in the
future. That karmic effect is very powerful.
For example, if you go out and suddenly meet
someone who has had an accident or
is in some way, or is very
poor, and you help them, then you forget about it
because you have become accustomed to the merit of giving alms and
helping others. Then, after
ten or twenty years, that person will suddenly become
successful, and they will come back to help
you. That is the karmic connection of the
person you gave alms to, causing them to
help such a person. It's not
accidental. In
this Dharma realm, nothing is natural,
nothing is random; everything is based on
cause and effect.
Therefore, those who give alms are
always happy;
whatever they need, they will naturally receive. Even
when you are in trouble—trouble is your karma—
but because of the merit of giving alms, at that
time you will...  You will receive help from others;
the merit of giving is like that. So,
if you are heartbroken or abandoned, it's because
your karma has prevented you from meeting the right
person who will bring
you happiness. Therefore, you have little merit from
giving, so you should refer
to Buddhist teachings. You should learn about giving
through material giving and giving through almsgiving. Almsgiving
can mean donating parts of your
body, for example, donating
blood or doing other things. Almsgiving is doing things
with your daily effort, helping others, showing filial piety
to your parents with your efforts,
that's almsgiving. Then
you do good deeds, you help
everyone, that's almsgiving and selfless giving.
That means you study and understand Buddhist teachings, you
encourage others to study and understand
Buddhist teachings, and through small karmic connections, you
convey the Buddha's teachings to people.
If you diligently give in this way,
all the opportunities that come your way will be
favorable. If you get
married, you will get a good spouse.
For example, Prince Siddhartha
married Yasodhara.  Isn't it good to be a
beautiful person? And she was also the one who helped
her husband, Prince
Siddhartha, who at that time was the king. At that time, King Siddhartha wouldn't let him go
outside the
main gate of the city. It was because he asked his father to allow the
Prince to leave the city gate. From there, the
Prince attained enlightenment. Then, one
night, Gia Dudhara, knowing her husband's intentions,
prepared a carriage, ordered the
driver, and at night, turned her face
to the wall, pretending to be asleep, so that Prince Siddhartha could
go out to
practice and attain enlightenment, benefiting
us all. The reason Gia
Dudhara understood Prince Siddhartha's intentions
was because
in many previous lives, Prince Siddhartha had often
made offerings to others, fulfilling their wishes. He always made offerings to people as he
saw them, and
now he met
someone who understood him and helped
him. So, if you want
beautiful love, you must know how to give to
others to make them happy. These are acts of giving that do
n't involve killing, acts of giving without
evil, acts that
benefit others, and acts of
high giving.  The most important thing is to learn Buddhist teachings yourself,
bring the benefits of Buddhism to everyone,
and we, the Three Jewels, here, are
bringing the benefits of Buddhism to
everyone according to the wishes of the teacher and
all of us. So, I
hope that all young people
understand these issues,
and you will see that your karma is still like this,
so don't blame
your loved ones. Because we
understand this, we will maintain
very beautiful relationships, right?
No hatred, no resentment.
This is to avoid
suffering when heartbroken. So, what can we do to
avoid heartbreak or suffering when heartbroken?
We must have this knowledge. With this
knowledge, those of you who haven't fallen in
love yet should think a lot
before falling in love, those of you who are in love should
also think a lot, and those of
you who are heartbroken should also think a
lot. We can all be
happy. I
[music]